so we are now going to talk about m-44
which is called the Beehive cluster
someone once described it as a swarm of
stars that feeling I could find on the
reasoning behind that but this one's
nice it's in the constellation of cancer
and it's actually one of the only
Messier objects you couldn't sort of see
we go naked eye so it's actually pretty
close to Earth so about 180 parsecs away
and only actually about 600 million
years old if you compare it to you know
the age of the earth that's 4.5 billion
years old so it really is a spring
chicken in astronomy terms it's got the
blue giants it's got the red giants
white dwarfs in there as well also it
has something that goes on in it that
happens in a lot of star clusters but
it's really obvious and I'm 44 so that
is this idea of mass segregation to
heavier stars have sank to the center
and the lighter stars are sort of left
around the outside and it's all to do
with sort of energy and momentum
exchange so if you have two stars in the
cluster that will have some interaction
or like a close pass with each other
then they're going to exchange energy
and momentum is they do that and
statistically if you have enough of
those interactions going on then
basically it sort of averages out so
that what happens is that in an
interaction the kinetic energy of the
two objects will equalize the ethic
energy goes as one half of your mass
times by the velocity squared so if
you've got two things in an interaction
and one of them has a higher mass than
the other one but they still have to
have exactly the same kinetic energy
after that interaction then if your mass
is high your velocity needs to go down
or if your mass is low your velocity
needs to go up to ensure that both those
objects have the same kinetic energy so
you can then imagine that the more
massive stars they slow down whereas the
lightest stars they get sped up if the
more massive stars slow down then they
don't really have as much energy to
fight off the effects of gravity and so
they're gonna sink to sort of the bottom
of that gravitational energy well and
end up in the bottom of the cluster okay
that is cool right is it a nice poster
child of my segregation but what I
really want to talk about is something
that was found back in 2012 they found
the first exoplanets in a cluster in
m-44 so we found a lot of extra planets
around stars in our own milk
way the first ones actually found in a
star cluster such as this were two stars
in the cluster and it took me ages to
find which stars they actually were in
the image you know I wanted an image
where like all of the stars were labeled
like with their names and numbers could
I find one no the first planet is around
this star here that is called PR Oh 201
B and the other one is down here these
two little double stars here the other
planet is around the bigger one of those
two and that is pro2 one 1b people
probably be familiar with the Kepler
space telescope that's the telescope is
actually staring at hundreds thousands
of stars and watching for dips in their
brightness and that's how it detects the
planet so you have a star that is
shining and that a planet passes in
front of it and that will cause the
brightness to dip and so we can assume
that upon Anna this paper however the
detective these two planets two bees in
the Beehive which again another
fantastic title from these writers I
love it when people come up with titles
like this and this is obviously
referring to the fact that the planets
are called pro2 one one B and P are 201
B so two bees in the Beehive which very
nice it's not a competition among
astrophysicists
totally yeah one of my favorite ever
asked her paper names was hot dogs in
the microwave which was hot dust
obscured galaxies observed with
microscopes hot doggies in the microwave
fantastic like no one will ever beat it
anyway so these planets that they've
discovered they didn't do that with
transits they did it with something
called radial velocity measurements so
if we think about what would happen if
we had two objects sort of next to each
other okay so if those two objects are
the same mass okay so you've got two
objects like this you know because
they're the exact same mass they're not
gonna orbit one going around the other
they're gonna orbit around a common
center of mass so obviously in this
setup that would be about here and they
would go around like that it would go
around each other if we think about a
star and a planet though one of them is
going to be much smaller than the other
so if we move this further away or this
becomes much smaller you're gonna end up
with a case where this one you know
stays pretty stationary and this one
goes around it the same way that we in
planets and starts to happen except this
will still have a center of mass it's so
the center of mass will be somewhere
like inside the star itself so then you
can imagine the star going around the
center of mass in a sort of wobble kind
of way you know you have a star that
here's its center of mass and it's not
quite in its own center so it will sort
of wobble around on the sky and so when
we actually observe the star wobbling
around what you'll then see is that a
light from That star gets red shifted
and blue shifted so it'll get slightly
blue shifted as it comes towards you and
then slightly red shifted as it goes
away from you so this is sort of like a
Doppler shift if you can observe a star
over a real long amount of time and you
can keep getting a spectra of that star
so where you split the light and you can
sort of get a redshift from that you can
see how that redshift changes and then
that's related to how much the velocity
is shifting as well so people work this
out for our own solar system so the
sun's sort of center of mass in our
solar system is not in its center so
Jupiter being the biggest planet in our
solar system would cause the Sun if you
were you know sort of observing it from
far outside the solar system it's have a
velocity shift of about 12 meters per
second over its entire orbit so over 12
years it takes Jupiter to orbit because
the other thing is you know the bigger
the planet is the more likely you are
therefore to see a wobble in a star that
it's going around but also the closer it
is to its star the more likely you are
to see it just because it's gonna have a
shorter period the closer it is to have
a shorter year so often their planets
that I found with this method or what
called hot Jupiters so Jupiter size are
you very big and are gonna have a big
impact on its star's center of mass and
therefore give it a big wobble but also
close in to their star and therefore hot
so these two planets that they found in
nvivo are hot Jupiters as well so real
life data on the left is pro2 1:1 so
they've got it in terms of what they
call phase so this is just sort of the
phase of the wave but basically this
whole variability took place over about
37 days for this one this planet and the
one on the right hand side is pro2 o1
and that variable
took place over 55 days see this one's a
lot more noisier but this one's really
nice and clean you can really see how
the velocity has shifted about say 300
meters per second because of this hot
Jupiter over the course of 55 days and
you can see where it's been blue shifted
towards us and then red shifted away
from us as well and so by doing these
observations and getting these different
red shifts of the spectra on each of
these occasions they've been able to see
this variation and say yes there's
definitely a planet there so hot
Jupiters though kind of a weird concept
right because to us in our solar system
we see the less massive planets in
towards the Sun and the more massive
planets out at large distances but that
might not be the norm we actually kind
of think now that our solar system might
be a bit strange in that respect these
hot Jupiters the way that people think
they've formed is that they actually
have formed far out from the star and
then migrated inwards and the reason
this migration happens is the same
reason that the more massive stars in
the cluster end up sort of gravitating
towards the center because you have all
these interactions of planets with you
know the asteroids and the proto planets
that are still forming around the star
and then they all exchange energy and
momentum and that changes their orbits
and causes the heavier things to slow
down and eventually migrated inwards
towards center with a star it's pretty
cool it's people a long time to even
explain how the solar system our own
solar system became to be why don't we
have Jupiter knocking on the door right
next to us and eventually people realize
that it was because Saturn and Jupiter
actually interact to sort of stop this
happening they've come into what's
called resonance and so they have this
sort of tight gravitational dance that
sort of locked in and stops them from
moving around so one of the big
questions though with planet migration
is it a very long process is it quite a
quick process and so what Emma 44
actually allows you to do is to put a
limit on that if you remember I said
it's kind of a spring chicken for
astronomy timescales it's only 600
million years old
and so with that and the fact that you
found hot Jupiters in that cluster you
can therefore say this planet migration
has to happen within 600 million years
not necessarily in all cases but it has
to be able to happen within 600 million
years and so m-44 is actually
really crucial in understanding how star
systems for narrow bands next to each
other I'm gonna get sort of like a
spectrum of how bright it is just as it
passes in front of the star the light
dips and there's passes it off again